---
title: dogs
---

#Eventing 29 Mar 2015

so I am a cs club president, which has involved planning or executing a lot of events and such.  Fairly large ones.  A 500 person, a 400 person and a 75 person particularly.  Hackathons and a hackathon-like.  This is an examination of the organization and logistics resources needed to run operations and the models that can bring about those resources.

The smoothness of dayof operation execution is all about the management of human resources.  This is contrary to expectations, because the operation is when all the material resources are consumed.  There are ultimately concerning constraints on both.  There is no time to explain complicated plans to people, but there is also a no time to perform some plans or consume certain resources after certain checkpoints have been met.  What this means is that all plans that need to be executed need to have someone on point (not in charge of executing the plan, but in charge of making sure the plan gets executed) for them.  This implies that these plans have been trained and are understood by some sort of human resource at the event.  Let's call these people _organizers_.  an org makes strategic decisions (they decide to scrap or rejigger plans, or to perform actions that might affect other plans) and holds executive responsibility (they catch the fallout if a plan is not executed) and the right to delegation.  Let's call dayof people without planning committee training, without the rights/duties of organizers, volunteers.

Point:  Your most effective, most trained resource for orgs is your planning committee.  The people who have been working on the event before working out dayof logistics.  Marketing/sales people (point - in ops of this size (4-500 people) the marketing people and the sales people need to be basically the same people, or sales has nothing to do until too late), administrative people and long term logistics planning people.  Now, traditionally you could call your planning committee your organizers, but I was part of an event where significant executive responsibility and strategic decisions devolved to individuals who were onboarded very late in the design process.  This is why I'm developing a vocabularial distinction.  A good rule of thumb _overlap between orgs and planners correlates with optimised smoothness of dayof operation execution_.  If politics keeps you from adding intended orgs as planners, or from including planners as orgs, seriously consider that decision.  You aren't just removing a body, you're removing a particularly well trained body.

I think the most significant consequence of late onboarding of organizers is that it pisses them off to no end.  Especially if the late onboarding procedure is a shitty one.  For instance, if necessary intel is not well conveyed, or you tell someone to do something big without giving them powers of delegation.  Point - trash duty is fairly complicated because it's hard to tell swag from trash.  Reorganizing or clearing rooms is also complicated because you need to know where to tell people to go, and where to put things that were in that room.  Many, many tasks involve making strategic decisions that aren't immediately obvious.

Now, this may seem like an acceptable sacrifice - but if your orgs are pissed off, they may just leave and drop off the network - they don't have the same attachment to having the event succeed that event planners - who strategic partners see as the face of the event.  They may decide not to help in future events, if that's important to you.

Now here's my theory: Onboarding from volunteer to organizer is one way, and comes as a package.  this is because trying to revoke that authorization in the middle of the operation complicates the chain of command and the information distribution network (it involves a redistribution of responsibilities which incurs a briefing cost)  corollary: try not to let executive/strategic decisions devolve to volunteers.  this has two problems, 1) onboarding - an intel gathering/debriefing cost for the new org, and 2) freshness - with every org you add, the more conversation links ideas will have to propagate over. everyone is going to have a completely different idea of what the hell is going on, and nobody will know who has the freshest on the ground intel.

what effective actions can we do to minimise growth of the organizer network/command structure?  make sure an org is on the ground for every plan, and if not, on the facebook chat or some other low cost messaging system.  if there aren't any orgs in the office or active on the fb chat, there aren't any orgs.  if there aren't any orgs, the first crisis that comes along, a volunteer is going to have to pick it up.  also, the help desk is manned by an org.  Without doubt.  If you don't have enough orgs to do this, you probably don't have enough orgs.

in summary, if a volunteer is put into a situation where he has to take executive responsibility or make a strategic decision, he continues to hold that power, should have access to the same intel network as other organizers, and should have powers of delegation.  now, this sounds like a nightmare.  someone who only knows half of what is going on has enough dayof authority to severely screw up the event.  but on the other hand, your organizer network is not sufficiently staffed to maintain itself, so this problem will continue to happen.  things won't be proctored by organzers, which is tantamount to things not happening.  It's better to onboard someone earlier than later, and there are probably adequate checks for trust in place already to make sure they don't screw everything up.  particularly, you're going to place more knowlegeable organizers on more mission critical tasks.

If you can't properly scale your organization network to match event demand, you're going to have a very hassley event.

